# Databases

## 2. Introduction to MongoDB

### Sorting data
the .find query can be further sorted or limited using .sort or .limit 
.sort({title:1}) will sort the results by title in ascending order. -1 would indicate decending order.
.limit(1) will limit the returned results to one document only.
.skip(1) will skip the first document and return the subsequent documents. 

### Operators and Arrays

COMPARISON
* `$eq`: Values are equal
* `$ne`: Values are not equal
* `$gt`: Value is greater than another value
* `$gte`: Value is greater than or equal to another value
* `$lt`: Value is less than another value
* `$lte`: Value is less than or equal to another value
* `$in`: Value is matched within an array

LOGICAL
* `$and`: Returns documents where both queries match
* `$or`: Returns documents where either query matches
* `$nor`: Returns documents where both queries fail to match
* `$not`: Returns documents where the query does not match

EVALUATION
* `$regex`: Allows the use of regular expressions when evaluating field values - searches for a pattern in a string
* `$text`: Performs a text search
* `$where`: Uses a JavaScript expression to match documents

* `$all`: can be used with an array to retrieve all documents which contain a subset of the values we pass. 
* `$in`: can be used with an array to retrieve all documents which contains either of the values we pass.

to query a key-value pair in a subdocument, you can use the dot operator. 

### Updating documents
`db.collection.updateOne({query}, {$set:{likes:2}},{upsert:true})`

the above command will update the likes value to 2 for a document that meet the query criteria. If no documents are found with the query criteria, then a new document will be added with the set information because upsert is set to true. 

you can also use the `$inc {likes:1}` option with the insertMany function to increment all documents that meet the query criteria.

### Updating arrays
to add an item to an array, you can use the `$push` operator.
`$pull` will remove from an existing array all instances of a value or values that match a specific condition. 

### Deleting documents
`db.collection.deteteOne({query})` or ``db.collection.deleteMany({query})`

### Mongo Shell

 mongosh has enhanced features compared to mongo. it enables things like the .help() option to explain how operators etc work.  
