# Databases

## 2. Introduction to MongoDB

### Indexes

Indexes support efficient execution of queries in MongoDB. Without indexes, MongoDB must scan every document in a collection to return query results. If an appropriate index exists for a query, MongoDB uses the index to limit the number of documents it must scan.

Although indexes improve query performance, adding an index has negative performance impact for write operations. For collections with a high write-to-read ratio, indexes are expensive because each insert must also update any indexes.

Creating an index involves the 'create index' command, specifying the field ('cook time' in this case) and its direction (e.g., descending). Similarly, dropping an index is achieved using the 'drop index' command, requiring the index name ('Cook time -1' in this instance).

`db.collection.createIndex({ name : -1 })`

There are different types of indexes that can be applied in MongoDB:
* single field index - Single field indexes collect and sort data from a single field in each document in a collection.
* compound index - Compound indexes collect and sort data from two or more fields in each document in a collection. Data is grouped by the first field in the index and then by each subsequent field.
* multikey index - Multikey indexes collect and sort data stored in arrays.
* text index - Text indexes support text search queries on fields containing string content. Text indexes improve performance when searching for specific words or phrases within string content.
* wildcard index - Only use wildcard indexes when the fields you want to index are unknown or may change. idk its super weird. 
* geospacial index - Geospatial indexes improve performance for queries on geospatial coordinate data.
* hashed index - Hashed indexes support hashed sharding. Hashed indexes index the hash of the value of a field.

### Collection types

Capped collections - limited to the number of documents a collection can contain and uses First In First Out principles. 
Timed series collections - efficiently store time series data. Writes are organized so that data from the same source is stored alongside other data points from a similar point in time. 

### Schema validation
MongoDB can validate data according to a set schema before insertion. 
