# Databases

## Introduction to MongoDB

### Configuration

config files are a convenient and secure way of managing mongo configuration settings. These files are written in YAML (yet another markup language). 

MongoDB allows multiple clients to read and write the same data. To ensure consistency, MongoDB uses locking and concurrency control to prevent clients from modifying the same data simultaneously

For example: In 'mongo-deep.conf,' we address locking by utilizing a log file with a specific location and appending by default. This is crucial to manage log file overflow, particularly in production databases.

It can also be used to specify storage location, replication settings and more.  

### Replication
Having one standalone database is discouraged due to potential issues like server crashes or unavailability leading to downtime in a production environment. To address this, mongoDB recommends using replica sets i.e running multiple identical copies of the database concurrently on different servers. If a primary node becomes unavailable, the secondary node will automatically assume its role.

commands like rs.status() and db.isMaster() are used to check replica set status. 

### Sharding
mongodb provides automatic sharding. Unlike a replica set that replicates data on all servers, sharding divides data among servers.

sharding introduces a new process called MongoS, acting as a router with a table of contents, tracking data locations using a shard key and config servers.

To automate sharding, enable it on the database, specify a collection, and choose a shard key. The shard key, which must be indexable, dictates how MongoDB breaks up the data. MongoDB dynamically adjusts shards as data grows, preventing imbalance.

### Authentication and Authorisation


### Backups
