# HTML & CSS 101: Introduction to HTML

## 6. HTML Working with Media

### Working with Audio
`<audio controls src="audio.mp3"></audio>`- including the controls attribute uses the built-in audio player controls. Alternatively you can use Javascript and the HTML media element API. The source element can be used within the audio element to specify multiple source files. MP3's are widely supported in modern broswers. OGG not so much. 

### Working with Video
Different codecs can be used to encode video data and compress it to be able to be shared across the web. H.264 is widely supported by browsers but it is not open-source. WebM and AV1 are open-source, royalty free. It is best practice to include options with all different codecs in the video element for the browser to choose which one it supports best. 

HTML does not allow for the resolution to automatically change while streaming depending on the network and screen-size. Steaming services have built their own version of **adaptive bitrate streaming**. Therefore it is common to embed codes from video hosting services rather than directly employing the video element.

### Working with Captions and Subtitles
a text file with .vtt extension can be included within the `<track src=".vtt" kind="captions" label="English"></track>` element which is nested within the `<video></video>` element. 
Each line of text in this file is accompanied by a time code, indicating when it should be displayed in the video.

### Embedding Media via iframes
Iframes can pose a security risk if used by other people to upload videos. 
