# Databases

## 1. Introduction to SQL

### 3. Data Types and Arithmetic Operators

Databases like us to declare upfront what kind of data each field will hold when we create the table.

SQL has various data types to choose from:

| Binary            | Date/Time | Numbers          | Text                 | 
|-------------------|-----------|------------------|----------------------|
|Binary             | Date      | BigInt           | Character            |
|Binary Large Object| Interval  | Decimal          |Character Large Object|
|Binary Varying     | Time      | Double Precision | Varchar              |
|                   | Timestamp | Float            | Nchar                |
|                   |           | Integer          | Nchar varying        |
|                   |           | Numeric          |                      |
|                   |           | SmallInt         |                      |
|                   |           | Real             |                      |

Another data type is Boolean.

Large binary objects are great for storing files, images or zip files. 
Varchar is great for storing text of variable length eg a person's name. It is a flexible and space-efficient data type. 

NULL is a special value that does not mean zero or no. It represents nothing in that particular field and can show up in any data type. 

### Compund SELECT statements:

SELECT first_name, last_name, quiz_points
FROM people
WHERE quiz_points = (SELECT MAX(quiz_points) FROM people);

You can reference other tables in the database as well. 

### Transforming data:

SELECT LOWER(first_name), UPPER(last_name) 
FROM people;

can change the case of the data displayed. It does not change the data stored in the table. 

SELECT first_name, SUBSTR(last_name, 2, 4)
FROM people;

^above statement selects a substring from last name starting from the second position and extracts 4 characters.

SELECT REPLACE(first_name, "a", "-")
FROM people;

^above statement returns all first names with the letter "a" replaced with "-".

SELECT quiz_points
FROM people 
ORDER BY CAST (quiz_points AS CHAR);

^above statement treats quiz points as text rather than numbers and orders them "alphabetically".

### Aliases 

Aliases can be used to rename the way a field is displayed in the ouput