# Databases

## 1. Introduction to SQL

### Adding data to tables

INSERT INTO people (first_name) VALUES ('Bob');

to view results:
SELECT * FROM people;

returns a new row with first name bob and all other fields NULL

You can do multiple inserts in one statement:

INSERT INTO people (first_name, last_name) 
VALUES 
('Alice', 'Johnson'), 
('Bob', 'Smith'), 
('Carol', NULL);

### Modifying table data

UPDATE people
SET last_name = "Morrison"
WHERE last_name = "Morrrison"

^ this will modify the data in the table and replace all entries of Morrrison with 3 r's to Morrison with 2. 
The WHERE clause is very important else the entire table or field will be affected.

### Remove table data

DELETE * FROM people
WHERE id_number = 1001;

will remove that particular record. Without the WHERE clause, all the data in the table will be deleted but not the table itself. 
to delete an entire table, use DROP TABLE table_name;

### Transactions:

{a set of SQL statements};
COMMIT;

You can also rollback a transaction.

Using transactions in SQL obeys basic principles of ACID properties:

- Atomicity: Either the entire transaction will be performed or nothing from that transaction is performed. It means there’s nothing like partial transactions.
- Consistency: It ensures consistency in the database. For example, if you have returned a book to a library, then the details of the book will be updated in all the related tables across databases.
- Isolation: The results of a partially completed transaction are not visible to other users.
- Durability: All the changes made by a COMMIT transaction are permanent in nature.
